---
title: 'Brain drain and mobile talent: where international development and higher education overlap'
date: Sat, 30 Apr 2016 18:25:01 +0000
draft: false
tags: ['cities', 'graduates', 'international', 'place', 'skills', 'Universities']
---

Development practitioners call it brain drain. In higher education it's called graduate retention. In the UK difficulties in retaining graduates in most cities outside of London is an obstacle to rebalancing the economy - a [recent study](http://www.ft.com/cms/s/0/7b730442-0196-11e6-ac98-3c15a1aa2e62.html) found 15 graduates leave Yorkshire for London for every one moving the other way. In development-speak, brain drain from one country to another is traditionally seen as leading to a 'human capital' deficit in the migrant’s home country. In some cases, an exodus of skilled workers has been encouraged. Devash Kapur [explains](https://books.google.co.uk/books?id=7wsbveDyBSUC&lpg=PP1&pg=PP1#v=onepage&q&f=false) how Zimbabwe, under the leadership of Robert Mugabe, has encouraged migration of 'disgruntled groups' to maintain authoritarian rule. Much of the Zimbabwean middle class, having the financial means to migrate, has fled to South Africa. Such migration benefits Mugabe, who maintains power and minimises opposition, whilst Zimbabwe receives remittances from the diaspora in South Africa, and South Africa benefits from skilled workers (in particular demand as many highly trained South Africans in turn have emigrated elsewhere). Others such as Easterly and Nyarko argue that there could be [some upsides](http://dri.as.nyu.edu/docs/IO/12607/DRIWP31.pdf) to brain drain. A few examples:

> The migrants themselves are better off, by revealed preference since migration is voluntary. The migrants may send remittances back to boost the incomes of those left behind. The migrants may have a positive effect on politics or institutions from abroad. The migrants may facilitate trading networks that increase source-country exports to the destination country.

I admire work that challenges conventional thinking, and I think most of this analysis holds up at both the level of the individual, and at a macro or national level. What's missing is the gap in-between: the impact on those places beyond the capital city, the 'second tier' cities, the towns and rural areas who lose their skilled workers and human capital. The retention of skilled workers in towns and cities outside the capital allows these places to become sustainable generators of their own human capital, training and educating the next generation who will work and study there, and in turn help that place to grow and to prosper. It's a virtuous cycle. Another argument worth exploring from Easterly and Nyarko is this one:

> The migrants may return home permanently or temporarily, bringing back technology.

If we substitute 'technology' for 'skills' (and other assets like networks and experience of other systems and cultures), similar arguments are made for higher education in the UK. Graduates move to London for their first job after graduating, but return to their home town - perhaps to start a family, or buy a house - for their second, third or fourth job. The graduates return more 'valuable' than they left, and the town benefits. Similarly, students studying abroad will return to opportunities at home, as seen in [Asia](https://www.timeshighereducation.com/news/asia-not-suffering-brain-drain-of-students-to-west). There is a 'boomerang' effect, with short-term investments giving medium-term returns. There's been some recent work on the role universities can play in retaining skilled graduates, and to help areas retain the skills and knowledge that are needed locally. About 18 months ago the City Growth Commission looked at the [role of universities in 'metro areas'](https://www.thersa.org/discover/publications-and-articles/reports/univercities-the-knowledge-to-power-uk-metros/). One recommendation proposed 'golden handcuffs' to retain graduates through monetary or other incentives. Another - and I think more promising - recommendation was to establish a graduate clearing scheme to funnel good-but-unsuccessful job applications to large graduate recruiters towards small enterprises. And last month, the Government Office for Science looked at [graduate mobility](https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/future-of-cities-graduate-mobility), drawing on five case studies of excellent work by universities fostering entrepreneurship, matching supply and demand, working with SMEs, and using data to improve retention. Ultimately, efforts to improve retention or to attract skilled people from elsewhere will fail if the place itself isn't an attractive destination to live and work. Universities clearly play a role here too. Work by KPMG describes ['Magnet Cities'](https://www.google.co.uk/url?sa=t&rct=j&q=&esrc=s&source=web&cd=1&cad=rja&uact=8&ved=0ahUKEwiB7ObEybbMAhXHJR4KHTVeDjIQFggcMAA&url=http%3A%2F%2Fkpmg.co.uk%2Fcreategraphics%2F07_2014%2FMagnet_cities%2Findex.html&usg=AFQjCNFNk3L6BW3oQcGBFGmRdk7NeqC7iA&sig2=LshxEMk-mTq-0CtTt5LUbg&bvm=bv.121070826,d.ZGg) that attract the young wealth creators of tomorrow, and in turn create an air of energy and excitement about a place. Several of the examples highlight the role of universities. The Government Office for Science report above talks about the importance of 'place attractiveness'. A recent book, ['The Smartest Places on Earth'](http://www.ft.com/cms/s/0/e600b592-e61c-11e5-a09b-1f8b0d268c39.html), argues that depleted industrial centres in the US and Europe are reinventing themselves, with the help of universities, as innovation centres that can solve the problems of the future. Migration is, of course, highly complex, with large cities also suffering from talent deficits in particular areas, masked by overall trends in movement. In London, creative experts are leaving for more affordable cities. Some commentators encourage the term ‘brain circulation’ to reflect this. Perhaps, above all else, mobility should be prioritised - it shouldn't matter whether a graduate remains in his or her town after graduating, but rather that the town attracts those people with the skills needed for its development, regardless of where they are from.