---
title: 'Avoiding blunders, splintering and exclusion in smart cities'
date: Wed, 07 Nov 2018 14:50:41 +0000
draft: false
tags: ['academic', 'smart cities', 'technology', 'Universities']
---

The Future Cities Catapult are hosting an interesting [breakfast briefing](https://futurecities.catapult.org.uk/event/breakfast-briefing-smart-cities-and-inadvertent-exclusion-a-toolkit-for-better-and-more-inclusive-smart-cities/) next week on ‘inadvertent exclusion’ in smart cities. Here’s the pitch:

> As more and more smart technologies are incorporated into the fabric of our cities, it has become increasingly pressing to ensure that those technologies reach the audiences they are intended to reach. This presentation introduces the concept of ‘inadvertent exclusion’, where potential users or consumers of smart city technologies are found not to engage with the possibilities that those smart initiatives can offer. It is argued that this may be the result of a misunderstanding of the importance of social difference in the way that cities work.

The research is based on the ESRC-funded project _[Smart Cities in the Making: Learning from Milton Keynes](http://www.scim-mk.org)_. The project asks how people in a smart city engage with smart technologies, and what difference the smart city makes. These are important questions. They also remind me of two related pieces of work. The first is the notion of ‘[splintering urbanism](http://en.forumviesmobiles.org/publication/2013/08/29/book-review-1136)’, whereby urban infrastructure can drive social and spatial inequality. The book is full of examples of both deliberate and inadvertent boundaries:

> In Baltimore… \[urban geographer\] David Harvey notes the paradox that, whilst African American women cross these boundaries daily to clean some of the world's most famous hospitals (for example Johns Hopkins), they are unable to access health services when they are ill because of a lack of health insurance. Meanwhile "life expectancy in the immediate environs of these internationally renowned hospital facilities is among the lowest in the nation and comparable to many of the poorer countries of the world".

The second is the 2013 book, _The Blunders of our Governments_. If you don’t have time to read the book, this [review in the Guardian](https://www.theguardian.com/books/2013/sep/04/blunders-government-king-crewe-review) is helpful. It’s worth quoting in full this explanation of how many blunders arise from a disconnect born from ignorance or social and cultural divides:

> The causes of the blunders were numerous. In many cases, ministers and their senior officials were simply ignorant – King and Crewe politely call it "cultural disconnect" – of how large sections of the population lived from day to day. The Tories had no inkling that, if sent a poll tax bill of several hundred pounds, some families, and particularly elderly couples, would not be able to pay. "Well, they could always sell a picture," suggested Nicholas Ridley, the then environment secretary and the son of a viscount, apparently in all seriousness. But Labour has become almost equally disconnected from real life, with its frontbenchers and advisers increasingly drawn from a cohort that went from school to university (usually Oxbridge) to Westminster thinktank without ever working in a retail store, a hamburger joint or a benefit office. Its tax credits scheme involved paying out weekly or monthly a sum that was determined annually. Millions of people short of money, many of whom had never previously completed a tax return, had to fill out complex forms about their previous year's earnings, estimate earnings for the following year and notify the authorities each time their circumstances changed. The scheme, as the head of the Inland Revenue admitted, went "spectacularly wrong".

This month I begin a tour looking at the role of universities in smart cities in eight European countries, for an exciting research project commissioned by the British Council. One question I’ll be trying to answer is how universities may be able to help prevent blunders, exclusion and splintering in the development of smart cities. If you're working on smart cities, please get in touch! ([Photo credit](https://unsplash.com/photos/cXZY0jh-9io))