---
title: 'The six stages of engagement'
date: Wed, 24 Oct 2018 14:31:12 +0000
draft: false
tags: ['academic', 'anchors', 'engagement', 'Universities']
---

Over the past couple of months I’ve given several presentations on university engagement in cities (slides below from a workshop in South Africa). One of the things I like to test with the audience is a sliding scale I've developed[1](#fn-762-1) of why universities choose to engage with local communities, businesses and other organisations: **1\. Financial incentives** **2\. Government push through policy (e.g. for knowledge transfer)** **3\. Branding; demonstrating social relevance** **4\. Enlightened self interest** **5\. Public/local/civic duty; (rediscovering) a historic mission** **6\. A strategic 'urban turn'** The theory is that, over time, many universities have moved from point one - choosing to engage locally because of perceived or actual financial benefits - to point five - a sense that engagement is part of the duty of the institution. The route is rarely a straightforward journey through all five, and in the messy reality of day-to-day engagement many stages will look remarkably similar. Between financial incentives and civic duty we have universities responding to government policy pushes (point two), described well by the likes of [Rhiannon Pugh](http://www.research.lancs.ac.uk/portal/en/publications/a-step-into-the-unknown(fec4bf30-2843-48ad-ac1d-6b257b71b8ef).html) and colleagues regarding initiatives such as Growth Hubs in the UK. Point three - engagement as a means to improving an institution’s branding and demonstrating social relevance - is often a scrambled response to universities coming under fire (usually from the press) for being societally irrelevant or out of touch. Enlightened self interest, point four, is the recognition that the fortunes of a university are often closely intertwined with the health of its locality. Point five is having civic duty at the heart of the university mission. This is garnering a lot of attention in the UK through the likes of the [UPP Civic University Commission](https://upp-foundation.org/report-identifies-a-crisis-in-adult-education-as-a-major-threat-to-the-uk-economy/) but, for many universities, is aspirational at present. Point six I’ve written about extensively on this blog. It combines points one to five, and proposes that the relationship between universities and cities is evolving. For some universities, the city has become a greater strategic concern and opportunity. There is evidence of universities slowly undertaking an ‘inward’ or local turn, from nation to city - for example university leaders prioritising city trade delegations over national ones - and institutions looking to take advantage of the globalisation of urbanisation and responding to the narrative over the ‘rise of cities’ and their interconnectedness. At the same time, universities themselves become vehicles for cities to achieve their goals - but I’ll save this for another post.

### Locating the Urban University slides

\[slideshare id=120567258&doc=locatingtheurbanuniversity-181024140523\]

[Finding Dan | Dan Grinwis](https://unsplash.com/@finding_dan?utm_medium=referral&utm_campaign=photographer-credit&utm_content=creditBadge "Download free do whatever you want high-resolution photos from Finding Dan | Dan Grinwis")

* * *

1.  With many influences, who shouldn’t be held accountable for my findings. Much of this thinking was prompted by an article by van Schalkwyk & George de Lange ([_The engaged university and the specificity of place: The case of Nelson Mandela Metropolitan University_](https://doi.org/10.1080/0376835X.2017.1419858) in the journal _Development Southern Africa_) and their call for _'the **delegitimisation** of one form of university-community engagement that values exchange with external communities for the financial benefit of the university (and is tenuously linked to the core functions of the university) and the **institutionalisation** of a form of university-community engagement that values place-specific development (while simultaneously strengthening teaching and research).'_ A second nod to the work of [Jean-Paul Addie](https://twitter.com/jp_addie) at Georgia State University (and convener of the Cape Town workshop) whose research on rethinking the urban university has been particularly influential. [↩](#fnref-762-1)